# ENHANCING EMERGENCY PLANNING DURING POWER OUTAGES USING MACHINE LEARNING
This thesis presents research aimed at intelligently optimizing the means in which emergency responders perform rescue operations. The goal of the study is to ensure that emergency responders are prioritizing rescue efforts in an efficient manner, improving upon current door-to-door methodologies. 
The study utilizes the Buffalo Blizzard of 2022 as a case study in an attempt to reduce time and distance traveled by emergency responders while also prioritizing aid to at-risk homes. Annual building load profiles of homes across the US were analyzed by machine learning models to perform classification on
appliance fuel types. These classifications were then imported to an evolutionary algorithm so that priority and secondary homes could be identified by emergency responders in the simulation. Data on Building Load Profiles of homes across the United States were obtained from Resstock. Power consumption over the
course of a year, set to monthly intervals was evaluated by the machine learning models. Road network data of Buffalo, NY and classifications from an SVC model were utilized in an MTSP evolutionary algorithm. The approach used in this study demonstrated that time and distance traveled by emergency responders when 
trying to reach priority homes can be reduced by more than 50 percent, depending on the circumstances. With such a reduction, the study demonstrates an effective way for emergency responders to attend to their communities and reduces the need to go door-to-door. The MTSP algorithm used in this research can also be 
iterated upon to include more than just one attribute per home. A variety of classifications and descriptions of homes can be conjoined to further evaluate the priority of homes. Road networks can be expanded to cover even broader communities. By employing an evolutionary algorithm enhanced by machine learning 
model predictions, emergency responders may be better informed about the rescues they need to make and can help save more lives in the process.
